# Chinook Salmon and Steelhead Trout Habitat Suitability Analysis
  An endangered species is a type of organism that is threatened by extinction. Species become endangered for two main reasons: loss of habitat and loss of genetic variation. A loss of habitat can happen directly or indirectly. Human activity is the main contribution to habitat loss. Development for housing for people to live, industry for people to work, and agriculture for crops and vegetation reduces the habitat of native organisms due to invading the space of the species.  Genetic variation is the diversity found within a species. Genetic variation allows species to adapt to changes in the environment. Usually, the greater the population of a species, the greater its genetic variation. Human activity can also lead to a loss of genetic variation. Genetic variation describes the variation in the DNA sequence in each of our genomes. Genetic variation is what makes all species unique, whether in terms of color, shapes and identity. Overhunting and overfishing are part of the genetic variation category have hurt populations of many animals. Reduced population means there are fewer breeding pairs. A breeding pair is made up of two mature members of the species that are not closely related and can produce healthy offspring. With fewer breeding pairs, genetic variation shrinks. 
  The Chinook Salmon and the Steelhead Trout are both endangered or threatened in California. Most the waterways and streams lead to the Pacific Ocean. Chinook salmon are the largest Pacific salmon species and, on average, grow to be three feet long and approximately 30 pounds. However, some Chinook salmon can reach more than five feet long and 110 pounds. They live in the colder upper reaches of the Pacific Ocean. Steelhead are a unique form of rainbow trout. Like salmon, they spent most of their adult lives in the ocean, but spawn in freshwater streams and rivers. Southern steelhead are survivors, adapted to seasonally dry streams in the arid climate at the extreme southern end of the steelhead range. Tens of thousands of these prized sport fish used to return to Southern California streams every year, but now they're stopped by dams and water diversions, urban development, and livestock grazing. Both fish species have been listed as endangered species in 1997.

  My code that i have written will create a map that displays the habitat areas where the Chinook salmon and the Steelhead trout are unprotected in the state of California. As you will see, the areas that are unprotected mostly reside in northern california. The areas are mostly lakes compared to the stream that they flow through. overall the project was very tough but i wanted to create a code that was GIS related so i can show my work at a potential job interview. The hardest task that was taken on in the project was creating clips. The program wouldnt take my clips after running them once because the shapefile was already created previously. The solution to this problem was that i would have to go into the folder where it was saved and manually delete every shapefile that was previously created. 
  
  I created this project becuase both the Chinook Salmon and the Steelhead Trout are both endangered or threatened in California. Most the waterways and streams lead to the Pacific Ocean. Chinook salmon are the largest Pacific salmon species and, on average, grow to be three feet long and approximately 30 pounds. However, some Chinook salmon can reach more than five feet long and 110 pounds. They live in the colder upper reaches of the Pacific Ocean. Steelhead are a unique form of rainbow trout. Like salmon, they spent most of their adult lives in the ocean, but spawn in freshwater streams and rivers. Southern steelhead are survivors, adapted to seasonally dry streams in the arid climate at the extreme southern end of the steelhead range. Tens of thousands of these prized sport fish used to return to Southern California streams every year, but now they're stopped by dams and water diversions, urban development, and livestock grazing. Both fish species have been listed as endangered species in 1997.
  
  The only code library that was used to created this project was arcpy. I created the entire project in ArcMap and used the IDLE window to organize the code and to make sure every code ran smoothly.
  
  The code i have written only does one thing but i could make some changes by adding shapefiles or changing species to create a different map. My code could also be a potential guideline to create a map in a different state or country. An example would be if i wanted to the the endangered types of mussels or mollusks that are flowing through the stream and lakes of Georgia all i would have to do is change the endangered species and download new data and i could basically copy and paste the new information into the code to retrieve a new result. 
  
citations:
1) “ECOSEnvironmental Conservation Online System.” Listed+Animals, ecos.fws.gov/ecp/report/table/critical-habitat.html.  
2) “SAVING THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA STEELHEAD TROUT.” Ocean Plastics Pollution, www.biologicaldiversity.org/species/fish/southern_California_steelhead_trout/.
3) “Chinook Salmon.” The National Wildlife Federation, www.nwf.org/Educational-Resources/Wildlife-Guide/Fish/Chinook-Salmon.
4) “The National Map - Data Delivery.” What Is an Earthquake and What Causes Them to Happen?, www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/ngp/tnm-delivery/gis-data-download?qt-science_support_page_related_con=0#qt-science_support_page_related_con.
5) Protected Areas Database of the United States, and Jmaxwell. Protected Areas Database of the United States, gapanalysis.usgs.gov/padus/.
6) “Hydrology GIS Data.” Datasets - Data.gov, Publisher Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 10 Aug. 2017, catalog.data.gov/dataset/hydrology-gis-data.
7) Dublin, Holly. “Endangered Species.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 12 Nov. 2018, www.britannica.com/science/endangered-species.
8) “CDFW GIS Clearinghouse.” California Department of Fish and Wildlife, www.wildlife.ca.gov/Data/GIS/Clearinghouse.

